One of the more popular areas,
although perhaps not
the largest by way
of aggregate gross valuation,
is the area of robo-advisory.
Many will ultimately come to
know FinTech through
that channel.
The definition of course
once again is fuzzy,
but it originally meant
financially advisory
businesses that
reduce costs of client service
by disintermediating humans.
Now, multiple models
have evolved over time,
including what we call
a bionic model that
incorporates both technology and
websites and enablement from
the tech part of FinTech with,
or coupled with, or grouped
with human interactions.
But we do see
a very broad spectrum,
ranging from pure machine
to just slightly enabled
bionic approaches.
Today a loose definition is,
a financial advisory firm,
a practice that uses
some kind of algorithm in
some way to build
an allocation for customers,
to build an investment
strategy approach.
These approaches usually
provide automated capture of
client information
that would include
potentially know
your client elements,
that are so important
in regulated space
like financial advisory arenas.
Financial goals,
liquidity preferences,
risk capacity to risk tolerance,
or risk aversion its inverse,
recommended allocations of
individual investments,
asset classes and so on.
Automated re-balancing,
tax loss harvesting
and progress reporting on
the way to financial plans,
ultimately resulting
in some kind of output
to investors or clients,
automated or otherwise.
This polemic notion of
a pure technologically
enabled non-interactive
robo-advisor,
really does not exist in
practice to my knowledge.
I don't think at this point
there's anything that
is purely a robo.
Two of the largest
independent robos,
Wealthfront and Betterment,
both do have the ability
for clients to get
in touch with them.
They have client service
representatives and expanding
business models that you might
ultimately call bionic, although,
they may wait them
significantly different
from say a broker dealer or
a financial advisory
firm that specifically
blends the human and non-human.
Sometimes we call it V
clinical and actuarial
approaches to advisory.
The pure vision of
robo advisory has not yet
purely been achieved,
in part because, it
is so important for
humans to touch humans,
and we'll have more to say
on that in just a moment.
From the perspective
broadly from industry,
the robo models also are very
important because it makes
clients with potentially low
levels of investable assets,
economically viable to service.
This is a very interesting and
important theme throughout much
of financial technologically
enabled advisory,
in part because of recent pushes
toward a fiduciary standard
in the investment advisory space,
that would apply
to brokers as well
as investment advisors alike.
Inducing a kind of pressure
or impetus or motivation for
certain players to segment
their books as
the cost of advice,
is expected to arise.
Sorry, to increase.
This notion of costs increasing,
may, although it's yet
to be entirely settled,
push higher cost per
dollar clients more toward
technologically enabled
platforms where
scale is possible as opposed
to taking them on in person.
One example which has grown
dramatically recently,
is the Vanguard personal
advisor services which was
re-branded after being
around for a long time,
a couple of years ago as a robo.
By June of 2015,
it had $21 billion of assets,
as of the first
quarter of 2019 it
had almost 116 billion.
By all accounts, it's
the largest financial robo.
Wealthfront, which is
another top 10 firm,
has about $11 billion of
assets as of the first
quarter of 2019.
Betterment overtook
Wealthfront AUM back in 2015,
and we'll discuss
that in a second,
having about $16 billion as
of the same mark to market.
90 percent of Wealthfront assets
have been placed in
vanguard funds as
part of the underlying strategy
across asset
allocation categories.
Betterment, in some sense,
is viewed to have caught
up with Wealthfront
by pivoting its business model to
emphasize defined
contribution plan sales
in smaller companies,
which historically has not
been the bailiwick
of Wealthfront.
Over the last several years,
certain large brokerages and
asset managers have acquired,
built or develop
robo-like offerings.
Firms like Blackrock,
Schwab, Merrill.
Fidelity controls much of
Betterment order flow,
and of course, also earns
referral fees in doing so.